---
layout: post
title: 'The Next Small BIG Thing is YOU!'
shortinfo: 'A call for more participatory democracy in Western societies and a first step towards it.'
---

<p class="message">
  The following is an essay I wrote for the <em><a href="http://www.symposium.org" target="_blank">St. Gallen Symposium</a> Wings of Excellence Award 2015</em>. The main topic of the event was <em>Proudly Small</em> and the essay was submitted in the category <em>What is the next small BIG thing?</em>.
</p>

##Abstract
This essay argues that Western democracies are, in a way, at a dead end: lobbyism, bureaucracy, party politics, and the resulting political apathy of big parts of society are major problems our democracies face. I argue that the solution to these predica- ments is more involvement of the people in form of more participatory, i.e. more direct, democracy. And the internet makes more participatory democracy easier than ever. So, it is you, the individual, that should be the next small big thing. I argue that more means of direct democracy are only a reasonable extension to tra- ditional representative democracies, as well as that decision making by the masses allows for the best outcomes. Finally, I introduce a project that has the potential to lay the groundwork for more people participation: a web platform that lets you vote on questions your parliament has voted on. I show how it can influence current political decisions and raise the question why we allow for the crowd’s wisdom in many other parts of life but not in politics.

##The Next Small BIG Thing is YOU!
I want to start out by introducing Ann. Ann is a 16-year-old girl currently going through the troubles of growing up. She is from the United Kingdom. Actually, she could live in any Western society, as she is completely made up. As a matter of fact, she could even be 17. I would like to give you a brief look into her life: if you ask Ann, what she and her friends mostly talk about, she will tell you a little quietly: "Boys." If you ask her, if she is interested in school and the prospect of a career, she will tell you: "Somewhat." If you ask her, what she wants to do with her life, she will say: "I have no idea." If you ask her, if she is at all interested in politics, you will hear: "No way."
At this point I would like to make a cut. It is probably no news to you that younger generations, especially teenagers, often lack an interest in politics. It likely has been this way with some degree of variation for quite some time. But I do not want to stop here. What I see is a growing alienation from politics in broad parts of society. Memberships in political parties have been falling pretty much steadily since the 1990s1, and voter participation has been decreasing for even longer in Western societies (Niemi Weisberg, 2001, p 31). Considering that the outcome of votes govern our basic rules of living together, these developments really are nothing to show off. On top, I would guess the average persons’s view of politicians is rather negative and her feeling of being heard in politics tending towards zero. I would go as far as saying:

##Western Democracies are at a Dead End
And here is why: I see four major problems that our democracies face these days. One has been outlined in the introductory paragraphs above: political apathy of the people. It is partly a problem in itself, but mostly a manifestation of other problems - such as lobbyism, bureaucracy, and party politics. Let’s look into each of those in a little more detail.
I have heard the saying that we don’t actually live in a democracy but rather in a ’lobbyocracy’. Looking at some numbers alone, you really start to wonder who is in control: in the EU there were about 15’000 lobbyists with around 2’600 permanent offices in Brussels alone in 2003 (Petrillo, 2013). If they were not able to pull some strings, they would not be there.
Bureaucracy is often associated with lengthy, troublesome, and inefficient processes
1 Based on numbers for Germany as found in the German Wikipedia entry on "Politikverdrossen- heit," engl.: political apathy (see bibliography).
￼2
and an overall waste of resources. But this is not the only cost of bureaucracy. As Michael Glennon (2014) from Tuft’s University points out in his new book, it often is essentially the bureaucrats in a vast and habituated system calling important shots, not so much politicians themselves.
My understanding of party politics is such that politicians get pressured into party lines and are, in a way, deprived of their own political will, that is often constitu- tionally secured. It just seems unreasonable to me that people can often just decide between two or three major political parties and then basically have to go along with any opinion the chosen party has on any issue. It appears just much more consistent that in reality one party is ’right’ on some issue, the other on some other issue, and a third again on a different question. Party politics deprive the political system of a much needed spectrum of opinion.
All these outlined problems contribute to a feeling of political apathy among major parts of society. Many people feel their voice is not heard and that politicians do as they please anyway. And in a way that is true. Considering the influences of lobby- ism, bureaucracy, party politics, and others there is reason to believe the political will of the people gets distorted along the way. The only political involvement - for often about half of the people in a society! (those that actually vote) - really is making one or two ticks on a piece of paper every four years or so.
Thus, the question must be: what can be done about it? And my answer is:
Back to the Roots: YOU
You are the smallest unit of decision making in society and the whole idea of democ- racy is based on you calling the shots. So, what I am saying is: we can and should allow for more direct or participatory democracy. There is nothing wrong about letting informed people make their own decisions. On the contrary: my proposition is that many of the above identified current problems our democracies have, are alleviated by more citizen involvement. And here is how:
Being part of the decision making process yourself for specific issues puts you in the driver seat. You feel more involved, as well as more satisfied with the outcome. Even if it did not go your way. At least you had a say and the decision was made under acceptable rules. Lobbyism would be cut out in the traditional form. Of course, one could oppose, lobbyists could cater to the people directly now. But that is unlikely to work out as long as people are sufficiently educated and informed. Bureaucracy could be reduced through according decisions, and the associated decision making powers of bureaucrats would be taken away if the people are in control themselves. Obviously, participatory democracy in the form of voting on specific issues causes
3
bureaucracy itself, but, as I will argue, it can be overcome these days and is by far outpaced by its benefits. The problems caused by internal political party behaviour are alleviated as it is no more the representatives deciding in certain questions.
On the other hand, one must account for drawbacks of direct democracy. One often hears suspicions such as that the people are able to make rather stupid decisions, or that direct democratic means such as referendums are practically impossible in big nations. To the first opposition I say: for the people’s decision to be a reasonable one, we need as much education and information as we can get. Also, looking at it statistically, if we assume the errors people make when deciding are distributed equally, they should cancel out. To the latter argument of the practical impossibility in big nations I say: the internet allows for rather easy democratic participation. Representative democracies, as we mostly have them these days, could just be seen as a middle step towards full, or at least more direct democracies. As it just was not feasible at the time to have everyone’s decision count on a regular basis, the representation by other decision makers, politicians usually, was only reasonable. But is it still? I say we have the means to allow for more participatory decision making. The press is often postulated as the fourth branch of government. As important as the press is, I could think of institutionalising ’the people’ as the fourth branch of government through direct democratic means and incorporating people’s votes on specific issues within the system of checks and balances between branches of government. Similar to what Switzerland is doing.
So, my answer to the question of the next small big thing is: ’the individual’ - through more democratic involvement. And here is the reasoning: decisions are always made by single people. These days the decision of someone gets blown up by the position he holds or by the institution he is part of. I ask: is a decision of a rice farmer somewhere in mainland China inherently of less worth than a decision by, say, Barack Obama? And I do not think so on a basic level. I believe single decisions are inherently of same worth and when aggregated over a large population should produce desired outcomes.
In a TED-talk titled The next age of government David Cameron (2010) argues that technology shifts power from government to the people and that it allows for more transparency of government action, more choice for the people, and more accountability of government. I definitely agree with Cameron, but I would go a step further and argue that technology - essentially the internet - allows for political decision making by the people themselves.
4
Here’s an Idea!
So, here is the idea I am currently working on and hope to launch soon: a web platform that lets you vote on questions your parliament has voted on. As simple as that. From that you will be able to see which politician and what party you mostly agree or disagree with. On top it can serve as a general barometer of political sentiments within society when comparing the people’s vote vs. that of parliament. There are already services that try to categorise your political view within the scheme of political parties where you chose between those answers that parties provided to different questions. These are mostly popular before big elections coming up. They try to guide you in making a decision. The problem here is that the evaluated statements are forward looking and parties are not really bound to any of their statements. So the idea I am currently developing is different in that it looks at answers to actual decisions in retrospect. In a sense political decision makers will have to own up more to the decision they made. Sure, one could argue that it is tough to own up to decisions that were made some time ago and with a possibly quite different set of information. But I think this is exactly the kind of scrutiny political decisions should face.
I see this idea as groundwork towards more participatory democracy. In a first step it has the power to influence current political decisions in the way that politicians are under more supervision by people voting on their decisions afterwards. Other means of influencing politicians from various directions are, on top, likely to become less effective. In a second step the system of voting on political questions by the people directly might actually be adopted for decisions in the real world if the political system and the people themselves regard more participatory democracy as valuable. I would like to end with the following thought: we live in an internet age and, nowadays, we dare to ask the crowd for anything. We make our purchase decisions based on what recommendations we find on the internet. We watch those youtube- videos that most others have viewed. We let the crowd finance our ventures and ideas when it comes to crowd-funding. So, I am wondering: why not ask the crowd to have a little more say when it comes to the decisions that govern our basic rules of living together?
5
Bibliography
Cameron, David W. D. (2010, February). The next age of government. TED.com. As found February 1, 2015, on http://www.ted.com/talks/david_camer on
Glennon, Michael J. (2014). National Security and Double Government. New York, Oxford University Press.
Niemi, Richard G. Weisberg, Herbert F. (2001). Controversies in Voting Behavior. Washington, D.C: CQ Press.
Petrillo, Pier L. (2013, February 21). Form of government and lobbies in UK and UE. A comparative perspective. ApertaContrada. As found February 1, 2015, on http://www.apertacontrada.it/2013/02/21/form-of-government- and-lobbies-in-uk-and-ue-a-comparative-perspective/
Wikipedia (2015, February 1). Politikverdrossenheit. Wikipedia: The Free Encyclo- pedia. As found February 1, 2015, on http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Politikverdrossenheit#Politik-.2FParteienverdrossenheit_in_De utschland














On January 11, 2013, a 26-year-old was found dead in his apartment in New York. His name was Aaron Swartz and he committed suicide in wake of facing a prison sentence of up to 35 years and a fine of up to one million dollar. Before telling his story and elaborating on it, let us first look at the initial proposition that led me to talk about him.

##The Good Old Days
In one or the other form one often hears the opinion *"that younger generations, as individualistic as they are, tend to settle for a highly streamlined social and economic world that does not ask for big decisions or unconventional thinking."<a href="#fn1"><sup>1</sub></a>* While this observation might be true, the emphasis should be on the word *tend*. Certainly, the majority of the young somehow fall into the outlined category. Nevertheless, I do not think that this holds true only for current times, but rather has been this way ever since: the majority of the people follow the well worn path and only some few step of the path, challenge the status-quo, and eventually shape the future.

The attitude that resonates in the statement above is one of romanticization of the past. Of course, in hindsight everything was better then than it is now: people were more involved, were engaged in politics, grew businesses, and helped each other out; where nowadays the youth just spends its time in front of TV, computer, and smartphone with no focus on school or doing chores at home but rather only looking for their own pleasure. But this is more of a generational conflict than it is a totally new phenomenon. Old people, fifty years ago, likely complained about the youth back then, who now does the same. This observation seems to stem from changing challenges and different environments - and the perception thereof - over time, and not from a becoming lazy or whatsoever of the youth. 

There are many current examples that underpin the involvement of young generations. Maybe not so much in areas that seem important to current older generations, but rather in areas that seem important to them, and are brought about by changing environments - the internet being one big transitional factor. One could talk about Mark Zuckerberg for example: the now 28-year-old billionaire who invented Facebook, that not only shaped and changed modern communication and socializing, but also helped giving a voice to people all over the world that formerly had none, and maybe even helped democratize the world in a sense when looking at its role in the only very recent Arab Spring. But I will not talk about him or any other  similar success stories that underline the involvement of young generations. 

##Aaron Swartz: Innovator, Idealist, Activist<a href="#fn2"><sup>2</sub></a>

Instead I want to talk about Aaron Swartz - a less known figure. I did not know him myself up until recently, when his death made the headlines of mass media. Aaron has been described as a kid genius (Lessig, 2013, January 12), as he has been a talented programmer from young age, involved in the development of the first version of the popular RSS feed at age 14, and other projects before and after. Later, after attending Stanford for a year, he founded the company Infogami that soon merged with Reddit, the now very popular social news website. Aaron was an equal partner in Reddit, but was later let go when Reddit was acquired. After launching another startup he became a fellow at the Center for Ethics at Harvard.
I want to focus on two areas of Aaron's involvement: first, the bringing down of the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA), and second, his quest of giving access to knowledge to everybody in the JSTOR case.

##SOPA: Ensuring Internet Freedom
Introduced in late 2011, SOPA sought to enable the US government to shut down websites in case of copyright infringements in light of the availability of the latest movies and TV-shows on the internet. There quickly formed a protest movement against the bill, which was sponsored by the movie industry. Aaron was at the heart of this movement.

As a keynote speaker at the *Freedom to Connect* conference 2012 Aaron told the story of the rise and eventual downfall of SOPA: the bill was supposed to be passed by the US congress quickly, with majority support, and without much notice. The latter did not quite work out as there quickly formed resistance against it, mainly on the internet. What looked as a sure thing eventually turned out a failure for the supporters of the bill. 

The main critique Aaron, his activist group *Demand Progress*, and others brought forth, was that the bill essentially gave the US government the power to censor the internet and thereby deprive Americans of the *freedom to connect* - what they thought to be a violation of the first amendment. As part of the protest movement many well known, daily used websites tried to raise awareness of SOPA by e.g. turning off their services for a day. 

By informing the public and organizing resistance, Aaron thus was at the core of overturning SOPA, which is an amazing achievement for a then 25-year-old - especially considering that, starting out, the bill had that much support among congress. Aaron ended the above mentioned keynote speech with an appeal to everyone (Swartz, 2012, May 21):

> The senators were right: The Internet really is out of control. But if we forget that, if we let Hollywood rewrite the story so it was just big company Google who stopped the bill, if we let them persuade us we didn't actually make a difference and we start seeing it as someone else's responsibility to do this work, and it's our job just to go home and pop some popcorn and curl up on the couch to watch Transformers, well, then next time they might just win. Let's not let that happen. 


##JSTOR: Democratizing Knowledge
To most of the academic world JSTOR will be known: it is a digital library of journal articles and other sources. And it charges quite heavy fees for access to its database - a fact that disturbed Aaron. After all, the knowledge in these articles was generated by scholars at public expense. And not even the scholars profited from their work, but rather only the publishing companies.

Aaron took action by writing a computer program that allowed for automatic downloading of these articles from JSTOR. After his first attempt at Harvard and the following disconnection of his account by JSTOR, he used the *open campus* platform of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) to access JSTOR. He placed a laptop in one of MIT's servers that kept downloading JSTOR articles by continuously faking a different identity of the accessing computer. But Aaron never got to making the articles available to the public as he was arrested before, but eventually got out on bail.

JSTOR was not interested in legally pursuing this violation of its terms and services any further and actually opened up more in consequence: shortly before Aaron's death it announced that it would make available a certain amount of articles online for free. MIT's stance in the matter was not that clear. The federal prosecutors nevertheless went forward with their case. The trial was set to start in April. Aaron committed suicide on January 11 of this year. Obviously, we can not fully understand what caused him to go this final step, but one must add that he was battling depressions also. The outcry on the internet and in the media was enormous after his death. The speculations around the cause and the role of the federal prosecution has been much discussed since. Gleen Greenwald (2013, January 12) wrote for *The Guardian* about his view on the case:

> Swartz's activism, I argued, was waged as part of one of the most vigorously contested battles - namely, the war over how the internet is used and who controls the information that flows on it - and that was his real crime in the eyes of the US government: challenging its authority and those of corporate factions to maintain a stranglehold on that information.

I have recently watched the film *Cloud Atlas* where one of the main characters commits suicide after writing to his lover: *"A true suicide is a paced, disciplined certainty. People pontificate suicide is a coward's act. Couldn't be further from the truth. Suicide takes tremendous courage."* This shall certainly not glorify committing suicide but rather gives an insight into what must have gone on in Aaron's mind. To be certain that the only way out is death reflects the situation he saw himself in. 

##So What Can We Learn?

Aaron did not shy away from bold action and tried to accomplish his ideals - even against the US legislative, the movie industry, and powerful publishing companies. And all that for what he thought right, not for any financial gain, power, or status - or as Harvard professor and close friend of Aaron, Lawrence Lessig (2013, January 12), put it in his blog:

> Aaron had literally done nothing in his life to make money. [...] Aaron was always and only working for (at least his conception of) the public good.

Sure, one can always argue that it was only *his* perception of the common good and that it does not give him the right to push through rigorously what he thinks right. But when looking at these, *his*, ideals, I - and I am sure many others - can only subscribe to them: for freedom and access to knowledge, and against government censorship - basic pillars of democracy.

I chose the title *United Stated v. Aaron Swartz* - the official case in the JSTOR prosecution - as it emphasizes the somewhat unequal battle on the one hand, and the conflict between government control and freedom in general on the other. Aaron certainly was acting against the current - in his case: legislators, Hollywood executives, and strong publishing companies - which makes the battle even more tough. The area of conflict between freedom and government control is an important and always existing one - raising the question: how much freedom should people give up in the hands of the government? I, for one, like to have as much freedom as possible as I would rather make my own choices than have somebody else make them for me. After all, the battle for this personal freedom has been a long one historically.

The story of Aaron Swartz gives rise to the question of what changes are necessary to foster an environment where courage like his is actually first enabled, and second rewarded? One could think of trying to reform incentives for courage in society - be it in the field of education, taxation, or any other - or of reorganizing institutions to allow for more individuality. But in the end, these can only facilitate courage. Courage itself has to come from within, or as Aaron put it in a 2010 interview when asked about the source of his drive (Swartz, 2010, January): 

> I feel very strongly that it's not enough to just live in the world as it is, to just take what you're given and follow the things that adults told you to do and that your parents told you to do and the society tells you to do. I think that you should always be questioning. I take this very scientific attitude that everything you've learned is just provisional that it's always open to recantation or refutation or questioning and I think the same applies to society. [...]

> So because I had believed for so long that change was impossible it precluded me from taking any actions that could have caused that change and so I think the first step for everyone out there is to believe that you can actually accomplish something because once you believe that you're half way to actually doing something.

### Footnotes
<p id="fn1">[1] As taken from the essay task.</p>
<p id="fn2">[2] The facts are mainly based on the English Wikipedia article on Aaron Swartz, but also from other sources where indicated. In light of the topics freedom of the internet and the common availability of knowledge that Aaron was, among others, fighting for, this source seems appropriate. Also Wikipedia is found to be quite reliable in various studies.</p>

### Bibliography

<a href="http://gu.com/p/3d3ad" target="_blank">Greenwald, Glenn (2013, January 12).</a> The inspiring heroism of Aaron Swartz. *The Guardion - Online Edition.*

<a href="http://lessig.tumblr.com/post/40347463044/prosecutor-as-bully" target="_blank">Lessig, Lawrence (2013, January 12).</a> Prosecutor as bully. *Lessig Blog, v2.*

<a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JUt5gjqNI1w" target="_blank">Swartz, Aaron H. (2010, January).</a> Aaron Swartz - We Can Change The World. *YouTube.*

<a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fgh2dFngFsg" target="_blank">Swartz, Aaron H. (2012, May 21).</a> F2C2012: Aaron Swartz keynote - "How we stopped SOPA". *YouTube.*

<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Swartz" target="_blank">Wikipedia (2013, February 1).</a> Aaron Swartz. *Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia.*
